---
layout: post
title: "Comparing Ember and React Components"
description: ""
category:
tags: []
---

{% include JB/setup %}

# Comment Box

Fridays at Greenfield are personal improvement days. We spend the day working on
something of our own choice that will help us grow as developers. We spent part
of a recent Friday going through the [React Tutorial][react-tutorial] as a team.
Since we're all [Ember][ember] developers, many comparisons were made.

The first time I went through the React Tutorial was over a year ago and, at the
time, I had lots of feature envy. Fortunately, many of the awesome features that
React has are now available in Ember-land.

We're going to use Ember to build the same application so we can compare and
contrast the way that both frameworks take advantage of components.

## Getting Started

We're going to use ember-cli to set up our app. This won't provide us with a
local API server to run like in the source files provided by the React tutorial
but we'll use another tool to handle that later on.

If you don't already have ember-cli installed, head over to [Installing
Ember][installing-ember].

To get started, we'll use ember-cli to generate a new Ember app:

```bash
$ ember new ember-comment-box
```

We can verify that our app is set up correctly by running the local ember server
and viewing the app in our browser at [http://localhost:4200](localhost):

```bash
$ cd ember-comment-box
$ ember server
$ open http://localhost:4200
```

## Recap

The main features of the app are:

- A list of comments.
- A form for adding new comments.
- Load comment data from a server.
- Optimistic updates.
- Markdown formatting.

Let's take a look at the component hierarchy:

```no-highlight
- comment-box
  - comment-list
    - comment-list-item
  - comment-form
```

We're going to have a `comment-box` component that has two child components,
`comment-list` and `comment-form`. The `comment-list` component will also have
many child `comment-list-item` components.

--- do a diagram! ---

Let's get to work!

Note: You may have noticed that we're using the name `comment-list-item` instead
of just `comment`. This is because Ember components require a dash in their name
in order to avoid conflicts with HTML element names.

## Your First Component

> React is all about modular, composable components

Great! So is Ember.

The first version of our `comment-box` component will simply display some text.
Since this component does not yet need any custom logic, we only need to create
a template:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-box.hbs --}}

Hello, world! I am a comment-box.
```

Now we can use the `comment-box` component inside the main template of the
application:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/application.hbs --}}

{{comment-box}}
```

### Handlebars vs. JSX

Immediately, we've run into one of the biggest differences between writing
components for Ember and writing components for React.

With React, whether you're a fan of the [JSX syntax][jsx-syntax] or not, you'll
be using JavaScript to generate the markup for your UI directly inside your
component. Relying on JavaScript rather than a separate templating language
allows developers to leverage the power of all of the features of the JavaScript
that they're already familiar with.

Ember takes a more traditional approach and uses [Handlebars][handlebars]
templates. Templates are defined separately from any JavaScript behavior that a
component might have. If a component doesn't require any custom behavior, a
template is all that you need to define in order to encapsulate a bit of UI.

Both approaches have their trade-offs and there is still plenty of discussion
around which approach is better.

## Composing Components

Let's build skeletons ☠  for the `comment-list` and `comment-form` components:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-list.hbs --}}

Hello, world! I am a comment-list.
```

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-form.hbs --}}

Hello, world! I am a comment-form.
```

Now we can use these new components inside our `comment-box` component:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-box.hbs --}}

<h1>Comments</h1>
{{comment-list}}
{{comment-form}}
```

### Component properties

Just like with React, components have their own isolated scope. Any data that a
component depends on needs to be passed in either as an attribute or as block
content within its opening and closing tags.

Let's create a component that depends on data that is passed in from its parent
context:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-list.hbs --}}

{{#comment-list-item author="Yehuda Katz"}}
  This is one comment
{{/comment-list-item}}

{{#comment-list-item author="Tom Dale"}}
  This is *another* comment
{{/comment-list-item}}
```

Lots of new stuff going on here:

1. We're passing values for the `author` attribute to each component.
2. We're invoking the component in **block form**. This allows us to provide
   extra content to be rendered inside the component's template.

In React, attributes passed to a component are available inside the component
via `this.props`. Ember handles this a little bit differently, setting the
passed attributes as properties directly on the component.

We can then access a component's properties from its template:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/components/templates/comment-list-item.hbs --}}

<h2>{{author}}</h2>

{{yield}}
```

`yield` is used in order to specify where to render the block content that was
provided to our component in the `comment-list` template, similar to
`this.props.children` in the React example.

With Ember's upcoming `GlimmerComponent`, attributes passed to a component will
be separated from the component's own internal properties. These attributes will
be accessible via `this.attrs`, similar to React's `this.props`. This a great
example of Ember's willingness to learn from and adopt strategies used by others
in the space.

### Adding Markdown

Just like in the React tutorial, we're going to use a 3rd party library,
[ember-markdown-it][ember-markdown-it], to convert our Markdown content to HTML.

Install the ember-markdown-it ember addon:

```bash
$ ember install ember-markdown-it
```

**Make sure to restart your local server after installing the addon.**

Next, update the template for `comment-list` to use the [markdown-render
helper][markdown-render-helper] to render the Markdown block content for each
`comment-list-item` component as HTML:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-list.hbs --}}

{{#comment-list-item author="Yehuda Katz"}}
  {{markdown-render "This is one comment"}}
{{/comment-list-item}}

{{#comment-list-item author="Tom Dale"}}
  {{markdown-render "This is *another* comment"}}
{{/comment-list-item}}
```

Helpers are just functions. They take some input and return a value. In this
case, we're passing a string of Markdown and returning a string of HTML to be
inserted into the DOM. Just like with React, strings inserted into the DOM are
escaped by default to prevent XSS attacks.

Ember's equivalent to React's `dangerouslySetInnerHTML` is
[Ember.String.htmlSafe()][ember-string-html-safe]. This function can be used to
tell Ember not to escape a given string when it is being rendered.

Here's a simple example:

```handlebars
{{greeter "Eric"}}
```

```javascript
import Ember from 'ember';

export function greeter([name]) {
  return Ember.String.htmlSafe(`<h1>Hello, ${name}!</h1>`);
}

export default Ember.Helper.helper(greeter);
```

We're going to rely on the addon to handle the Markdown rendering for us but the
[full implementation of the markdown-render helper][markdown-render-helper] is
not much more complicated than the example above. You should check it out :)

### Hook Up the Data Model

It's time to remove the hard coded comment data in our template and use a blob
of JSON as our data source. This data will eventually come from from a server
but we'll get to that later.

Since we're using ember-cli and ES2015 modules, we're not going to create a
global variable for our comment data. Instead, we'll set the data as a property
of this route's controller.

```javascript
// app/controllers/application.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const { Controller } = Ember;

export default Controller.extend({
  data: [
    { id: 1, author: 'Yehuda Katz', text: 'This is one comment' },
    { id: 2, author: 'Tom Dale', text: 'This is *another* comment' }
  ]
});
```

Here's a quick rundown of where this controller fits in:

- We visit `/` (the default route for our app).
- The route sets up an `Ember.Controller`
- Ember generates a default `Ember.Controller` if we haven't defined one,
  which was happening until now.
- We subclassed `Ember.Controller` to provide a custom `ApplicationController`.
  This controller will now be used instead of the generated one.
- A Controller is basically a top-level, singleton component for your route.
  We're just going to pretend the `ApplicationController`'s context is the
  global context used in the React tutorial.

Now the hierarchy of our app looks like:

```
- ApplicationController (the one we just made)
  - CommentBox
    - CommentList
      - Comment
    - CommentForm
```

We want to make the `data` available to the `comment-box` component. We can
accomplish this by passing in the `data` property of our `ApplicationController`
as the `data` attribute of the `comment-box` component:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/application.hbs --}}

{{comment-box data=data}}
```

And now we can do the same to pass the `data` property of the `comment-box`
down to the `comment-list`:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-box.hbs --}}

<h1>Comments</h1>
{{comment-list data=data}}
{{comment-form}}
```

The final step here is to render the `comment-list-item` components dynamically
by replacing our hard coded comment data with the `data` being passed in:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-list.hbs --}}

{{#each data as |comment|}}
  {{#comment-list-item author=comment.author}}
    {{markdown-render comment.text}}
  {{/comment-list-item}}
{{/each}}
```

We use the [{{#each}}][each-helper] helper to iterate over each of the items in
`data`. Inside the `{{#each}}` block, we replace our hard coded strings with
references to properties of the `comment` object that we're currently iterating
over.

### Fetching from the server

It's time to replace all the hard coded data and begin fetching our data from a
server. The first step is to pass the URL that we want to fetch to our
`{{comment-box}}` component from its parent context:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/application.hbs --}}

{{comment-box url="/api/comments"}}
```

### Reactive state

So far, we've been using properties passed from the parent context in order to
render our components, each component being rendered once based on the
properties it has been given. Since we want our data to be fetched from the
server by our component, we're going to need to store some state.

Until now, we've only been working templates for our components. We need to jump
over to JavaScript now in order to define some custom behavior for our
component.

Let's subclass `Ember.Component` and create an array to hold the state of our
comment data:

```javascript
// app/components/comment-box.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const { Component } = Ember;

export default Component.extend({
  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.data = [];
  }
});
```

This is the Ember equivalent of using `getInitialState` in React. Whenever an
instance of a component is created, its `init()` function will be called. We
need to call `this._super(...arguments)` when we override the function to make
sure that the component's usual initialization steps still take place. Next we
set the `data` property of our component to be an empty array.

#### Setting up our server

Like I mentioned earlier, we're not running the server provided by the React
tutorial. We're going to use the [ember-cli-mirage][ember-cli-mirage] addon to
set up a mock server so we can simulate making network requests to a real
server.

Install the addon:

```bash
$ ember install ember-cli-mirage
```

**Make sure to restart your local server after installing the addon.**

Replace the default Mirage config with the following:

```javascript
// app/mirage/config.js

export default function() {
  let comments = [
    { id: 1, author: 'Yehuda Katz', text: 'This is one comment' },
    { id: 2, author: 'Tom Dale', text: 'This is *another* comment' }
  ];

  this.get('/api/comments', () => {
    return comments;
  });

  this.post('/api/comments', (db, request) => {
    let comment = JSON.parse(request.requestBody);
    comments = comments.concat([comment]);
    return comments;
  });
}
```

#### Updating state

Now that we have our mock server set up, let's start fetching some data.

Set the `url` attribute of the `comment-box` to the URL we're going to be
fetching comments from:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/application.hbs --}}

{{comment-box url="/api/comments"}}
```

The first thing we're going to do is inject the [ember-ajax][todo] service into
our component. We could use the usual `$.ajax` but the [ember-ajax][ember-ajax]
addon is included by default with ember-cli and provides a much nicer API.

```javascript
// app/components/comment-box.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  inject
} = Ember;

const { service } = inject;

export default Component.extend({
  ajax: service(),

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.data = [];
  }
});
```

Now we can use the `ajax` service to fetch our comment data when a `CommentBox`
is created:

```javascript
// app/components/comment-box.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  get,
  inject,
  set
} = Ember;

const { service } = inject;

export default Component.extend({
  ajax: service(),

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.data = [];

    get(this, 'ajax')
      .request(get(this, 'url'))
      .then((comments) => set(this, 'data', comments))
      .catch((error) => console.error(error));
  }
});
```

Here we use the `ajax` service to send a request to the URL we've passed in as
the `url` attribute of our component. When we receive a successful response, we
set a new value for our component's `data` property, which will cause our
component to rerender.

Let's implement live updates using simple polling:

```javascript
// app/components/comment-box.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  get,
  inject,
  set
} = Ember;

const { service } = inject;

export default Component.extend({
  ajax: service(),

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.data = [];

    this.loadCommentsFromServer();

    setInterval(
      this.loadCommentsFromServer.bind(this),
      get(this, 'pollInterval')
    );
  },

  loadCommentsFromServer() {
    get(this, 'ajax')
      .request(get(this, 'url'))
      .then((comments) => set(this, 'data', comments))
      .catch((error) => console.error(error));
  }
});
```

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/application.hbs --}}

{{comment-box url="/api/comments" pollInterval=2000}}
```

We moved the data fetching to a separate function and call it when our component
is first initialized and every 2 seconds after that. Open your browser's
**console** and you should see the mocked network requests being logged by
Mirage.

### Adding new comments

> Now it's time to build the form. Our `CommentForm` component should ask the
> user for their name and comment text and send a request to the server to save
> the comment.

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-form.hbs --}}

<form class="commentForm">
  <input type="text" placeholder="Your name" />
  <input type="text" placeholder="Say something..." />
  <input type="submit" value="Post" />
</form>
```

#### Controlled components

> With the traditional DOM, input elements are rendered and the browser manages
> the state (its rendered value). As a result, the state of the actual DOM will
> differ from that of the component. This is not ideal as the state of the view
> will differ from that of the component. In React, components should always
> represent the state of the view and not only at the point of initialization.
>
> Hence, we will be using this.state to save the user's input as it is entered.
> We define an initial state with two properties author and text and set them to
> be empty strings. In our `<input>` elements, we set the value prop to reflect
> the state of the component and attach `onChange` handlers to them. These
> `<input>` elements with a value set are called controlled components. Read
> more about controlled components on the Forms article.

TODO: Explain difference with Ember

```javascript
// app/components/comment-form.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  setProperties
} = Ember;

export default Component.extend({
  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.author = '';
    this.text = '';
  },

  actions: {
    handleAuthorChange(e) {
      setProperties(this, { author: e.target.value });
    },

    handleTextChange(e) {
      setProperties(this, { text: e.target.value });
    }
  }
});
```

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-form.hbs --}}

<form class="commentForm">
  <input
    type="text"
    placeholder="Your name"
    value={{author}}
    oninput={{action "handleAuthorChange"}}
  />
  <input
    type="text"
    placeholder="Say something..."
    value={{text}}
    oninput={{action "handleTextChange"}}
  />
  <input type="submit" value="Post" />
</form>
```

#### Events

> React attaches event handlers to components using a `camelCase` naming
> convention. We attach `onChange` handlers to the two `<input>` elements. Now,
> as the user enters text into the `<input>` fields, the attached `onChange`
> callbacks are fired and the state of the component is modified. Subsequently,
> the rendered value of the input element will be updated to reflect the current
> component state.

TODO: Diff between Ember

#### Submitting the form

> Let's make the form interactive. When the user submits the form, we should
> clear it, submit a request to the server, and refresh the list of comments. To
> start, let's listen for the form's submit event and clear it.

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-form.hbs --}}

<form onsubmit={{action "handleSubmit"}} class="commentForm">
  <input
    type="text"
    placeholder="Your name"
    value={{author}}
    oninput={{action "handleAuthorChange"}}
  />
  <input
    type="text"
    placeholder="Say something..."
    value={{text}}
    oninput={{action "handleTextChange"}}
  />
  <input type="submit" value="Post" />
</form>
```

```javascript
// app/components/comment-form.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  get,
  setProperties
} = Ember;

export default Component.extend({
  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.author = '';
    this.text = '';
  },

  actions: {
    handleAuthorChange(e) {
      setProperties(this, { author: e.target.value });
    },

    handleTextChange(e) {
      setProperties(this, { text: e.target.value });
    },

    handleSubmit(e) {
      e.preventDefault();

      let author = get(this, 'author').trim();
      let text = get(this, 'text').trim();

      if (!author || !text) {
        return;
      }

      // TODO: Send request to the server
      setProperties(this, { author: '', text: '' });
    }
  }
});
```

> We attach an `onSubmit` handler to the form that clears the form fields when
> the form is submitted with valid input.

> Call `preventDefault()` on the event to prevent the browser's default action
> of submitting the form.

TODO: Ember difference

#### Callbacks as props

> When a user submits a comment, we will need to refresh the list of comments to
> include the new one. It makes sense to do all of this logic in CommentBox
> since CommentBox owns the state that represents the list of comments.

> We need to pass data from the child component back up to its parent. We do
> this in our parent's render method by passing a new callback
> (handleCommentSubmit) into the child, binding it to the child's
> onCommentSubmit event. Whenever the event is triggered, the callback will be
> invoked:

```handlebars
{{!-- app/templates/components/comment-box.hbs --}}

{{comment-form onCommentSubmit=(action "handleCommentSubmit")}}
```

```javascript
// app/components/comment-box.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  get,
  inject,
  set
} = Ember;

const { service } = inject;

export default Component.extend({
  ajax: service(),

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.data = [];

    this.loadCommentsFromServer();

    setInterval(
      this.loadCommentsFromServer.bind(this),
      get(this, 'pollInterval')
    );
  },

  loadCommentsFromServer() {
    get(this, 'ajax')
      .request(get(this, 'url'))
      .then((comments) => set(this, 'data', comments))
      .catch((error) => console.error(error));
  },

  actions: {
    handleCommentSubmit(comment) {
      let url = get(this, 'url');

      get(this, 'ajax')
        .post(url, { data: JSON.stringify(comment) })
        .then((comments) => set(this, 'data', comments))
        .catch((error) => console.error(error));
    }
  }
});
```

> Now that `CommentBox` has made the callback available to `CommentForm` via the
> `onCommentSubmit` prop, the `CommentForm` can call the callback when the user
> submits the form:

TODO: Ember diff

```javascript
// app/components/comment-form.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  get,
  setProperties
} = Ember;

export default Component.extend({
  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.author = '';
    this.text = '';
  },

  actions: {
    handleAuthorChange(e) {
      setProperties(this, { author: e.target.value });
    },

    handleTextChange(e) {
      setProperties(this, { text: e.target.value });
    },

    handleSubmit(e) {
      e.preventDefault();

      let author = get(this, 'author').trim();
      let text = get(this, 'text').trim();

      if (!author || !text) {
        return;
      }

      get(this, 'onCommentSubmit')({ author, text });
      setProperties(this, { author: '', text: '' });
    }
  }
});
```

### Optimization: Optimistic updates

> Our application is now feature complete but it feels slow to have to wait for
> the request to complete before your comment appears in the list. We can
> optimistically add this comment to the list to make the app feel faster.

```javascript
// app/comments/comment-box.js

import Ember from 'ember';

const {
  Component,
  get,
  inject,
  set
} = Ember;

const { service } = inject;

export default Component.extend({
  ajax: service(),

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    this.data = [];

    this.loadCommentsFromServer();

    setInterval(
      this.loadCommentsFromServer.bind(this),
      get(this, 'pollInterval')
    );
  },

  loadCommentsFromServer() {
    get(this, 'ajax')
      .request(get(this, 'url'))
      .then((comments) => set(this, 'data', comments))
      .catch((error) => console.error(error));
  },

  actions: {
    handleCommentSubmit(comment) {
      let oldComments = get(this, 'data');
      let url = get(this, 'url');

      set(comment, 'id', Date.now());

      let newComments = oldComments.concat([comment]);
      set(this, 'data', newComments);

      get(this, 'ajax')
        .post(url, { data: JSON.stringify(comment) })
        .then((comments) => set(this, 'data', comments))
        .catch((error) => {
          set(this, 'data', oldComments);
          console.error(error);
        });
    }
  }
});
```

[each-helper]: https://guides.emberjs.com/v2.5.0/templates/displaying-a-list-of-items/
[ember]: http://emberjs.com/
[ember-ajax]: https://github.com/ember-cli/ember-ajax
[ember-markdown-it]: https://github.com/greenfieldhq/ember-markdown-it
[handlebars]: http://handlebarsjs.com/
[installing-ember]: https://guides.emberjs.com/v2.5.0/getting-started/
[jsx-syntax]: http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/displaying-data.html#jsx-syntax
[localhost]: http://localhost:4200
[markdown-render-helper]: https://github.com/greenfieldhq/ember-markdown-it/blob/master/addon/helpers/markdown-render.js
[react-tutorial]: https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/tutorial.html
[templates-vs-jsx]: https://twitter.com/mjackson/status/715306475686535168
